Service Animal / Emotional Support Animal Agreement

Per the American Disabilities Act, LifeMoves at Mountain View provides accommodations for service animals. According to the ADA, only dogs can be certified as service animals. 
Definition of a Service Animal:
A service animal is a dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for a person with a disability. Examples of such work or tasks include guiding people who are visually impaired, reminding a person with mental illness to take their prescribed medications, calming a person with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) during an anxiety attack, etc. 
Service animals are working animals, they are not pets. The work or task a dog has been trained to provide must be directly related to the person’s disability. Dogs whose sole function is to provide comfort or emotional support do not qualify as a service animal under the ADA.
LifeMoves is not legally required to accommodate Emotional Support Animals (ESA) and will only do so under special request. This request must be made prior to the client’s intake and will be considered by the Program Director or Associate Program Director. Requests made after intake will not be considered. 
1.Rules and Exclusions
Under the ADA, a service dog must be harnessed, leashed, or tethered, unless these devices interfere with the service’s animal’s work or the individual’s disability prevents using these devices. LifeMoves always requires that all animals (both service and ESA) remain on leash with the Client while they are on the premises. Failure to do so after multiple reminders could lead to the animal being discharged from the program.
According to the ADA, a person with a service animal can only be asked to remove his service animal from the premises if (1) the dog is out of control and the handler does not take effective action to control it or (2) the dog is not housebroken. If LifeMoves staff identifies an animal (either service dog or ESA) is not under the handler’s control or are not housebroken, the client will be given opportunity to rectify the situation. If the Client fails to get the situation under control, the animal will be discharged from the program.
Staff are not required to provide care or food for service animals. All residents with service animals and ESA are required provide services for their animals on their own. If the resident leaves site, they are expected to take their animal with them. They cannot leave the animal in the care of another resident, even for a short period of time.
2.Inquires and More
Upon intake, Staff will ask the resident if the animal is required due to a disability and what tasks the animal is trained to perform. County law requires that all animals are licensed through one of their animal control licensing agencies. The licensing process requires a current and valid rabies vaccination. Both the license tag and rabies tag are required by law to be always worn on the dog's collar. Documentation of these two requirements is required to be provided during intake by the resident.
3.Accommodations
LifeMoves agrees to provide reasonable accommodations to service animals and ESA (that are admitted to the program). This includes: 
Providing reasonable accommodations and allowing access to the service animal to all areas that are accessible by the public.
Providing resources to the resident to ensure that they can reasonably maintain the care of their animal. 
If the animal is not able to meet the guidelines listed above, the animal will be discharged from the program, but in most cases the Client is welcome to stay in the program.   
If any client does not follow the rules above, after warnings and attempts to rectify the situation, LifeMoves staff reserves the right to discharge the animal for the specific stated issues. Failure to comply with these requirements may result in termination of eligibility of current and future stays at LifeMoves facilities.


I have read and understand the Service Animal and Emotional Support Animal guidelines. 
I agree to abide by the behavior conduct for myself and my animal.


		
 Client Name	

			
 Client Signature	Date



			
 Staff Signature	Date
